---
title: "Challenging the Norm: The Zen of Zero-Waste Living"
author:
  name: Rise Riyo
date: 2023-11-13
tags: LocalPlaces
excerpt: If you’re traveling south along the Pacific Coast Highway, through the coastal cities of North County San Diego, you’ll be able to visit a little gem that is nestled in the shopping center of the Lumberyard. There, you’ll find Local Scoop
---

If you’re traveling south along the Pacific Coast Highway, through the coastal cities of North County San Diego, you’ll be able to visit a little gem that is nestled in the shopping center of the Lumberyard. There, you’ll find Local Scoop, founded by Katie Fletcher, a zero-waste food store that offers customers a selection of certified organic essential food items in bulk, and in packaging that is simply tasteful to the eyes but not wasteful for the earth.

So what exactly is zero-waste? According to Wikipedia, “Zero-waste, or _waste minimization_, is a set of principles focused on waste prevention that encourages redesigning resource life cycles so that all products are repurposed (i.e. “up-cycled”) and/or reused.” This coined term, zero-waste, reminds me of my parents whose perspective of eating-everything-on-our-plates reflected the raw experiences of impoverished kids raised during WW2. It also brought to mind the practice of various consciousness-raising circles with which I was acquainted in and outside of undergrad and post-grad schools in the 1980s and 90s where we practiced this concept of zero-waste living; we just didn’t have a name for it at that time.

My colleague, Megan Jakoby, and I have been keen on visiting Katie and her shop to ask about her interests, concerns, and challenges of running Local Scoop. Megan and I are participating in Cohort 4 of the Climatebase Fellowship. So Fletcher’s journey of creating Local Scoop falls right into place with our climate change curriculum. One could say that the extant of Katie’s shop is a testament to applying the set of principles of zero-waste into actual practice. Moreover, the cool thing about Local Scoop is that it not only provides yummy, nutritious food and other essentials for the shopper, it also provides an inviting local community space for customers to learn about the principles and practice of waste minimization.

Case in point: As one walks into the retail space, right away one feels a peaceful ambience of pure organization and bliss. Wooden-framed glass dispensers filled with various grains and dried fruit are evenly spaced and wall-mounted. There are also glass jars of bulk herbs, spices, and sweet treats. Elsewhere, organically handmade soaps and other personal self-care items are available for purchase. There’s even a small refrigerated section offering shoppers local homemade hummus, gluten-free salad dressing, and fresh organic produce from small family farms across North County.

All items can be placed in your own personal, reusable containers or in a provided reusable non-plastic bag. If you’re toting a lot and forgot your grocery bags, no worries. Fletcher sells a shopping bag imprinted with the Local Scoop logo and made of certified organic cotton fabric with inner pockets to conveniently hold your reusable containers in place. With the types of products offered to their carefully placed display throughout the shop adds to the little touches that make Fletcher’s shop so pure and simple. It bespeaks of Kondo-like minimalism. Katie has basically thought of everything to make the customer feel welcomed and not apprehensive of asking questions about the practice of zero-waste.

As we meandered from shelf to shelf, we found Katie near the back of the shop tenaciously working on the many daily list items that she needed to cross off before the end of the day. With a small break, Fletcher met us outside nearby, but close enough to quickly provide quality customer service for any shoppers entering into the store.

A native of Solana Beach, Fletcher grew up around the beauty of sand, surf, and sun. In 2013, she entered Yale University enrolled in courses in public health and environmental science, as well as classes in the history of medicine and psychology. While an undergrad, she realized how culturally and socially-engraved food was and the difference of food products between the East coast and the West Coast. “Through my classes, I became increasingly interested in nutrition and global agriculture techniques, including the history of large-scale farming and food manufacturing developments in our country,” states Fletcher.

Katie was able to live abroad in three countries; one of them was Australia. It was there in Sydney that she was introduced to the concept and practice of zero-waste. Growing up in Southern California, she was not accustomed to single-packaging food products. Instead, she was obliged to shop at big supermarket chains because that was what was, and still remains, predominantly available for SoCal residents. When she returned to the States, she found that in the local vicinity of her hometown there was not a store that offered zero-waste packaging. “For years, I revisited this search with no success. I started buying bulk from places like Amazon and Costco as an alternative. This solution was alright, but I always felt disheartened when a box would arrive with three additional boxes and plastic wrap around each item. My efforts felt fruitless.”

One Sunday while biking along PCH, Fletcher had an epiphany. A zero-waste store would never be available for her to shop in in North County. She would have to make it available and accessible by creating such a space on her own. Since then, Katie has been brainstorming, consulting with professionals, raising funds, marketing, organizing local zero-waste events, working with local small businesses to launch Local Scoop into the brick-and-mortar that it is now.

Seeing the sparkle in Katie’s eyes shows her commitment and passion for practicing, sharing, and offering to the public what a zero-waste life might entail. But at the same time, a glint of worry surfaces when speaking about running a novel business in North County. Like any small business, it comes with a lot of challenges. “I find myself working late into the night and on weekends realizing I haven’t finished everything on my to-do list,” states Fletcher. There simply isn’t enough time in the day to accomplish everything that she alone needs to do to keep Local Scoop running smoothly.

Renegotiations for leasing the retail space, dealing with staff turnover, juggling the expiration of perishable items, and figuring out which vendors are genuinely zero-waste sellers can cause anyone to be concerned. “Sometimes I find that vendors will wrap things in plastic once I open the package. Then, I know not to buy from them again.” Megan and I silently shake our heads as a way of offering some form of condolence to Katie’s challenges.

Marketing is another major factor and the most difficult challenge for Fletcher. “I’m not into social media, which makes it even more difficult for me.” It’s here though that Megan jumps in and offers her expertise as an events planner and volunteers her spare time to promote Local Scoop on social media. Katie smiles telling Megan, “That’s so nice of you. That would really help out a lot!”  Yes, indeed, it takes a community.

These pain points are all too common for a start-up such as Local Scoop. Its philosophy is sound, its mission is attainable, if given a support system in place. We already understand the need of having a zero-waste store such as Local Scoop. Providing nutritious food items through a zero-waste pipeline and mitigating the serious effects of climate change can feel overwhelming and daunting. But as a native North County San Diegan myself, the need to adopt such a practice as zero-waste living is crucial. How often have I read in the past year of local seaside cliff erosion that is already occurring up and down our beautiful beaches along the Pacific coast? Too often. One way of working towards curbing the rise of global temperatures is right here in our own local region. We can do our part by becoming a supportive shopper at Local Scoop. In doing so, it becomes one small, healthy step toward a greener planet.
